when people think of a culture along the
Nile in the in ancient times I think
they just think of the of ancient Egypt
but we're in Sudan right there was a
major ancient civilization here urban
literate powerful kings that controlled
a vast empire in the eighth century
bigger than any Empire that had ever
been on the Nile before and here we are
standing in front of pyramids of these
kings
2,000 kilometers south of the pyramids
of Egypt
this is Murie a royal cemetery
containing pyramids for 20 kings and 54
queens of the nubian Kingdom known as
cush we climbed the ruin side of the
pyramid belonging to taharka the
greatest of all koushik pharaohs who not
only ruled sudan but the whole of Egypt
as well
[Music]
Oh an epic view
this is spectacular yeah this is what
some historians recently and writers
have called the black Pharaohs yeah this
is a culture and a civilization distinct
and different at some times in its
history too to the civilization further
down the Nile in Egypt but they were
closely related they shared same
religion they honored the same gods the
the Kushites believe that the Egyptian
gods were here in the in the cush eyed
form in the Nubian forms because there's
this overwhelming focus on the
civilization of ancient Egypt
it wouldn't be unnatural for Egyptians
modern Egyptians to think well we've
been here for thousands of years this is
our culture this is our land this is our
River as well but the fact we are
standing on a pyramid here in northern
Sudan built by people whose descendants
may still live around us now I have a
feeling that that gives them some sort
of historical more legitimate claim to
the land and the water and the space it
does you know but but there's a funny
thing that I noticed in Cairo and that
is that on the facade of the Cairo
Museum
the only dynasty that isn't named as the
25th dynasty and that was the dynasty of
cush which ruled them so they're the
dynasty of the nubian hair
some archaeologists in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries refused to accept
that a black African civilization could
have achieved what it did they said the
people here must have been lighter
skinned maybe Libyans maybe even early
Europeans as racism
you